[Music]
we're here to talk about
negotiating m a deal terms and thought
that it might make sense to start really
right at the top and discuss some of the
key components to negotiating a
transaction factors to consider in
negotiation strategies
i think all generally within the context
of the hypothetical scenario that we've
got
with the east coast acquisition east
coast
pardon me east corporation's acquisition
of west corporation
but uh it may direct our first question
to dina
and to rachel uh to try to focus
on what you consider to be some of the
more critical components of a
transaction
and some factors that would help you
determine
how to address those within the context
of a transaction
and negotiating the terms and maybe the
most obvious starting point is on
valuation
so maybe given the hypothetical that
we've been asked to consider
maybe walk us through how you might
consider you know evaluation strategy
um well i think when you're looking at a
tech
company that you're acquiring i think
the first question i would ask
is am i really focused just on the
patents and the trademarks and the
actual
assets that are registered or am i
really focused on the people
and do i really you know am i highly
dependent on their sales team or their
founders or certain innovators
and depending on the answer to that
question you would
structure the transaction differently so
if it was a former i'd be really
pretty much okay just saying okay here's
your purchase price
give me your ip and walking away if it's
the latter and i really need those
people
i would really need to structure the
transaction to make sure that they stick
around
and that they're motivated to do their
best for us
in the same way as they were when they
worked for themselves or worked in their
old structure
i think from from a strategic point of
view i agree with everything um
that that was just said but i'd also add
that a lot of the consideration is
around the synergies and
you know what is the point of the
acquisition um you know is this a
tuck-in acquisition that we're trying to
then
you know merge with something we already
have is it going to be a stand-alone
business unit you know what are we going
to do with the acquisition and
how does the acquisition say it's a
technology play right what kind of
synergy do we have with what we already
what we already own because that can
also impact
you know maybe not the valuation per se
but what you're willing to pay
you know the multiple you're willing to
pay in order to acquire the technology
or the people
thank you and i think we had talked and
you mentioned it just a moment ago and i
know nate that we had talked earlier
about retention
and different ways to maybe structure
the transaction or structure either
bonus structure or or whether it's use
of an escrow or or an earn out rather
um how have you seen your clients
addressing retention different ways it
depends on who you're trying to keep
happy right there's always if
it's the right structure you can always
use a rollover of equity
those are always popular particularly
founders or other important people
i'm seeing more bonus structures for
people who aren't
the top guys but they want to keep
around it built into a deal
what other things are you guys seeing
being used out there to keep the people
that you want to keep happy
so as a financial buyer we almost always
want to keep management and most of
if not all the employees around so
we typically try to set up our
incentive structure with equity to give
them capital gains treatment for
their for their investment
and also hope that it will keep them
around for longer
our equity would be subject to vesting
which will help with retention
and it will also align them with
maximizing equity value for us
since they're kind of along for the ride
so that's typically how we do it
i would think that as a strategic you're
probably thinking about it differently
yeah so i i think there were quite a few
strategics here so as a strategic we
come at it a little bit differently
because
depending on the size of the acquisition
and what's happening people are going to
be
rolled into what we already have and
they're going to be kind of
you know we're a big company and they're
going to be leveled in advance of
um you know coming in and put into you
know they're going from a ceo maybe to a
director level or a ceo to a vice
president level and so
you know you have a whole organization
and a structure where people who are
already employees of this company are
making a certain amount of money within
a band and they're
getting a certain amount of equity
within a band and so you can't then
bring people in and say by the way
here's your
gigantic amount of equity or gigantic
amount of cash that would then upset
kind of the ecosystem you already have
going in your company because of course
everybody will know
so you know we have to be quite creative
in terms of
um ways to structure things so that
people
you know people are retained and we also
have to
be honest with ourselves in terms of
what we can do in order to actually
retain people going forward
we spend a good amount of time looking
at you know how much
is you know ceoa going to make in
connection with this transaction
and is what's the likelihood that we can
actually retain them right if they're
getting a hundred million dollar payout
like we're probably not going to be able
to do
all that much um to actually financially
get them to stay
like the incentives may need to be more
along the lines of
you know title and responsibility and
you know other kind of more intangibles
right so
it's a very different different
calculation and one that takes an
awful lot of our um brain power
in connection with any sort of
acquisition
[Music]
if you're interested in additional
information on innovation in m a
i encourage you to check out the
transaction advisors institute
which is a robust source for knowledge
on m a best practice
we host a series of m a conferences run
an elite m
a academy offer m a master classes
conduct m a research organize the m a
leadership council and publish a
prestigious m a journal
members of the transaction advisors
institute include corporate executives
board members and private equity
investors that are interested in
understanding the critical
issues impacting transaction planning
structuring and execution
i encourage you to get more involved in
the institute
so then i guess the curiosity is you
know
when you're looking at these various
considerations and
and then obviously gearing up to towards
the negotiations how
how does the nature of the party i mean
i think we talked about here
we've got a strategic acquirer in east
corp but i'm not certain that we've
really sussed out
what the ownership structure is of of
westcorp i think we know
some some some basics around the target
the target's profile but not really the
ownership so
curious and i'm sure different people in
the room may have have different
experience than this but
curious how the ownership of that target
might affect your negotiations
yeah so i mean i guess i'll start so if
it's founder owned and actually the
founders still involved i think there
can be a lot more emotion
um involved in the acquisition as
opposed to if it's something where
the founders kind of taken a back seat
they've brought a cdo in
specifically to sell the company or you
know has the founders kind of already
transitioned out
you know it also depends on how broad
broadly distributed the equity is
how much of it is options versus how
much of it is actually stock
a lot of it for at least for us and
maybe other strategics do it differently
in terms of you know when you're talking
about structuring indemnities
um you know the actual mechanics of any
sort of you know payouts of escrow and
those kinds of things
and we have a strong preference for
paying out just what we'll we'll put
stockholders in an escrow but we don't
want to put the option holders in escrow
because paying through payroll is a
gigantic pain
you know especially when you're talking
three three years down the road and then
you've got to go
find you know the hundreds of different
people i mean that's
it's my worst nightmare so you know all
of that really
impacts how we then think about
structuring what we're doing in terms of
specifically an indemnity package in
connection with the transaction
if the founder is still involved it
really is a question of are they going
to walk away are they staying
for the people we want to keep around
and it's important to us to keep around
if their owners will want them to roll
over maybe half of their stock i mean
we're happy for them to cash out some
amount
we're always focused on are we giving
them so much cash that they have just no
incentive to work anymore
people have different thresholds for
that but i would estimate that you know
somebody's getting 10 million dollars or
more they really don't feel they need to
work
for 250k a year anymore so um
we really try for those critical people
to both motivate them and force them to
continue
uh the really critical people know that
they are critical to the business and
they
and so if you make them roll over a
significant portion of their equity
or you give them
enough incentive equity to really
motivate them
that will usually keep them around
there's also founders who really are
emotional about their businesses i know
the california way is sort of be a
serial entrepreneurial
preneur but a lot of times if you've
worked on a business and made it big
enough for
a large strategic or a financial buyer
to buy you you've been working
on it for a long time it's not two-year
project it's your baby you've worked on
it for 10 plus years
and so a lot of these founders want to
stay with us and they don't want to let
go control the business so actually
they'll be very focused on
negotiating employment agreement or
something like that that lets them
continue
and that gets the problem of what
happens when you do have a founder that
has a big equity stake
and we as a strategic buyer saying well
we're going to want you to park
x percent of these proceeds in an escrow
and that founder is going to look at
that as
as her money or his money and uh
maybe the purchase price is high enough
that
everyone's okay with it but the fact is
that if you're going to make a claim
against that escrow you're taking it
away from your
current division lead or the former ceo
or whatever role that person is playing
in your go forward organization
and that can be tricky so tricky i
haven't had a client
who had a straight dead bang reps claim
against the founder of a company that
acquired
and it decided not to make the claim
because it didn't want to
we didn't want to upset him that was
that goose was still laying golden eggs
that's really a good point if we know
that we have people continuing with us
we're not going to want a normal
indemnity package because the last thing
you want is to go to one of your
employees and say hey write me a check
so we will always if the people are
continuing with the company we're always
going to be looking at an earn out
structure or an escrow or some other way
like reps of warranties insurance to get
the
downside protection because we don't
want to harm our upside by
covering you know whatever downside
there is and we have had situations
where you know a state tax claim
or something will come up that the
sellers are responsible for
but we always want it to be a situation
where we are not asking them to write us
a check
there is some other source of funds for
it
and we talked about founders and we
talked you know some of the dynamics of
some of the challenges
now if there's venture capital involved
it gets at the point where you're
seeking to acquire the target
how does that affect your negotiations
how does that affect some of the
considerations we've been talking about
well as a financial
um buyer we're also a financial seller
and so
you know i find that they're going to
have the same priority i would when we
sell a portfolio company which is
luck we'll negotiate whatever indemnity
package we negotiate but there is a cap
and that's it so there will be an escrow
there will be whatever it is
but the second i get that cash i
distribute it to my lps
and i do not ever want to be in a world
where i have to go to my investors and
claw back funds
obviously under my fund agreement i'm
allowed to do that if we owe an
indemnity claim we can ask girl piece to
fund that but i never
want to be in that situation so i will
always insist on just an absolute cap
for everything even fundamental reps
yeah how about purchase price
adjustments
purchase price adjustments that's the
new thing now caps on ppas that we're
starting to see can you believe it and i
have that in a lot of my deals like it
will be capped at we'll have a purchase
price adjustment escrow for six months
or whatever and it's kept there
yeah we're working through that now
and i you know in our world on the
insurance side of the house that also
becomes more problematic just given the
way the insurance has been set up so
i will say from my perspective and me
personally
i love when i see vcs in a deal on the
other side because it's very clear
right it's dollars and cents and there
it is and you know we can negotiate
around it and it's dollars and cents
that you you avoid
kind of all of the the founder potential
issues
which i think can be much more difficult
to navigate because it's not just
right there for you to deal with right
um so
i think it can be a really um it can be
very beneficial
you know we may not be on the same side
of issues but the issue is clear
and they have a cleaner shop usually if
a financial buyer's already been in the
house
and that's i think that would have been
my next follow-up question is also then
when you're looking at diligence in the
target is it then a different experience
and
granted everything likely changes based
on the personalities
i mean one founder is different from the
next founders different from the next
but
i wonder if you were to compare sort of
founder own targets to
a financial sponsor that owned it if
it's cleaner is it is does that make the
diligence process easier
i do think so because someone else has
our intelligence the company
but i also find in a company that's
still founder owned
you're very dependent on sort of just
the innate level of talent
that that management has and and the
people that they hired have because
they've never really
gone been professionalized and they've
not have not necessarily worked in these
huge companies where they know
best practices for everything so if
they're really all over the map
once you buy it on what you have to do
to make things
operate the way that they should and i
think the most common thing you have to
you
replace when you go into a company that
has been is still founder run
is usually the cfo because their entire
finance
function doesn't really operate properly
or
maybe with the accuracy or level of
analysis that you want
and i i would say that also makes your
diligence
really challenging because you are
reliant always
for diligence on what they give you and
you kind of have to assume they're being
honest and they're usually being honest
but you also have to assume some level
of accuracy which may or may not be true
especially when you're looking at
finances and things like that
sure but you know where someone like
sergio come to us with a deal
that they've found it isn't a banker
represented seller
it's not someone who's on the market
it's just somebody they know about they
want to get
yeah that company might not have the
great you know might be a year off
quickbooks
or whatever but it may be an incredible
opportunity so you work through those
things as best you can
i mean that's you know the diligence may
not be as good but
you're gonna have maybe an opportunity
there you wouldn't get for a company
that was
run by a financial buyer and i think
then we can apply that to the fact
pattern here where you've got
a tech company growing at a pretty rapid
clip and then you've got
some of those hurdles to clear including
you know financial statements which
we've talked about you know now a bit
and
you know in the absence of say audited
financials i mean if they're a year off
quickbooks right
um you know just just finding a way to
get yourself comfortable
on the basis of your financial diligence
that you know that
the results are are adequate and that
they've been keeping things in order
well and even if they're audited that
doesn't mean they're accurate
fair enough especially when you change
auditors isn't that interesting how
suddenly that causes issues well i mean
i guess you asked the question
yeah um yeah no that definitely is and
then
uh you know so so moving on to actually
negotiating the terms of the deal
now you've taken a look at some things
that you're going to focus on
obviously in the course of determining
your interest and determining valuation
and then understanding how best to to
diligence this target
um then i guess turning to how you
negotiate i mean
i don't know if focusing on particular
reps is a good jumping off point here
i think for me a lot of it depends on
kind of the transaction and what i mean
by that is
is this a situation where there was a
deal process in place where you know
they're selling themselves the bankers
were engaged they're shopping this it's
a competitive process
and so like you're providing a markup of
an agreement which is going to be
compared against a whole bunch of other
people along with your price
or is it a situation where you know our
you know corp dev group was out hunting
basically
and you know said we want these guys and
you know they
engage them in an exclusivity period and
then we're approaching them with like
this is what we're prepared to do
depending on that
posture you know what posture we're in
it'll look really different
in terms of the terms right
and where we start as far as how
competitive competitive
and market-based and whatever else you
want to say we are in terms of the
various terms we offer up
it's also dependent on how sophisticated
the seller
is you know if they're represented by
simpson thatcher
i know that they're going to catch every
nuance in what i write
but if maybe they don't you know they
have their single shingle
law firm that does everything
representing them because they're old
friends you know i can get away with a
little bit more
so i definitely try to place my audience
but ultimately
i think a seller is really focused
usually on purchase price and that's
about it so
as long as you're not doing things in
the agreement to shift a lot of
liability to them
or to somehow subtract from that
purchase price significantly
in an auction they're going to pick the
highest price i've been
almost always i've been in auctions
where we gave the best
agreement on earth and the best
indemnity terms on earth or whatever but
if you don't have the highest price you
lose
and the only secondary factor again is
this situation where you have perhaps
some equity holders or ceos or whatever
who are really vested in keeping their
jobs and staying around or controlling
the company and
and there you have some room to play
well
i'm tempted to ask the question about
where you spend more time negotiating on
various points although obviously that's
going to
wildly vary thinking about something
maybe a little bit more near and dear to
a lot of people's hearts in this room
um in an auction context what are
what's everybody seeing in terms of
formal exclusivity period these days and
um you know sellers appetite for running
multiple parties to sign
um time periods that they're allowing to
to complete diligence once they've
actually made a decision
curious how many hours basically how
many i mean yeah i mean
yeah exactly right well it's certainly
a seller's market right now that's for
sure um
in the really competitive auctions for a
strong company
there you may not get exclusivity at all
it could be that you negotiate the
merger agreement
over the weekend while they negotiate
two three other people they pick their
best person and they sign monday morning
um but that's still unusual i
typically they will pick like their lead
their lead bidder and give you some
amount of exclusivity
i don't see those 60 90 day periods
anymore
i'm seeing a lot more like 14 to 30 days
but i perhaps i'm cynical but i
generally enter
these exclusivity arrangements assuming
that we're going to extend them multiple
times
it does happen right we get these short
periods and we just end up extending
them yeah it just doesn't really matter
because
once they have told their other bidders
to go away for two weeks or three weeks
or four weeks
and they've spent two three four weeks
negotiating with you usually they're
kind of pregnant on the deal
and they'll just keep they'll just keep
going and they'll extend until you get
it done
yeah i agree 30 days extended extended
extending yeah
and is that really to keep a particular
bidder's fee to the fire
i mean i think it's just what people are
willing to agree to up front is
you know 30 days it looks worse when you
come in you're like i'd like 180 days of
exclusivity
right not that we ever go 180 days but
you know
um yeah yeah and the biggest conflict
for
many of my clients were these compressed
exclusivity periods and
if they had deals that involved reps
insurance is a critical part of the deal
trying to get the reps insurance locked
down when you didn't have exclusivity
and just even a couple years ago you had
to pay the insurance carrier hundreds of
thousands of dollars
to give you a bindable quote before you
had at least de facto exclusivity
and now there's more insurers who are
willing to do that for a lot less money
so if i have a buyer and the insurance
is really important part of the deal
and they don't have exclusivity they can
still get that bindable quote to rely on
when they sign with the with the
seller even if they don't have the
diligence completed yet
yeah i mean it's it's it's definitely
been interesting because i think
when you've seen a seller actually wire
rep some rit's insurance into
a into an acquisition agreement
it at least suggested or implied that
there was gonna be a little bit of extra
time there at least three to five
business days in order to get it
to get the insurance process done but
you're right i think with the growing
awareness of the availability of
pre-exclusivity you know as needed it's
not
probably it's probably not the perfect
process it's
it's it's moving quite quickly and
obviously as the rest of the deal teams
are
but it no longer really implies that
there is this
um unspoken anticipated period of
exclusivity
um we just did a uh market exercise
yesterday on um on pre-exclusivity fees
and you're right it runs a gamut from
from nothing to thirty thousand dollars
actually to a hundred thousand dollars
extra so there still is
a wide variety but i think that there is
definitely ability to get that done
so maybe using that as a transition and
and talking about some of the challenges
that you faced in negotiating some of
these transactions and
worrying about retention and worrying
about maybe proceeding against a founder
or a shareholder for something maybe
beyond the purchase price adjustment
name
what has your experience been in using
an alternative recourse mechanism like
reps and warranties insurance and
how have you seen it affect deals how
have you
seen it be responsive to some of these
challenges that we've talked about
in the context of drafting terms well
we're primarily still using to try to
bridge a gap
right you have two parties i'll give you
an example from from out here
um you have a seller that is being asked
to provide
a hundred percent indemnity on ip
because like a lot of deals in the
valley
ip is why we're one of the main reasons
we might be buying a company
and that seller doesn't want to give you
100 indemnity
um so how do you bridge that gap and one
deal we bridge the gap on
with my partner louis laho a couple
years ago was
the seller actually paid for the buyer
to buy
insurance against the ip reps and
the buyer didn't buy a hundred percent
at the end of the day but they
compromised at 45
so that gave the buyer some recourse not
having to go chase down
the sellers um and which was nice for
the buyer the seller paid for it
but the seller also got to walk away
with certainty that at least um
a huge chunk of the deal consideration
was was in their pocket
so it's still primarily is a gap bridger
and again you might have founders that
you want to keep happy you don't want to
make claims against them
um there can be a number of reasons
maybe the fun that you're buying from is
closing
so an indemnity from them isn't worth
anything or they know they can't give
you an indemnity so you've got to look
at
insurance or other things maybe it's a
particular problem like uh
i think in this example west corporation
as a tax issue
i mean tax insurance it will do that all
day long
as long as it's something that is
material to the deal but still a remote
issue or something we can at least put a
risk number around right like that's
probably a two million dollar problem
well fine i can buy insurance if it's a
two and a half million dollar problem or
more
um that's the kind of thing that that
we're we're using it for every day
and more more and more strategics that's
the biggest change in the market that
i've seen the last three years
is this has now become not just a
strategic
buy side um poli
pro thing to get but also now i see
strategics using it on spins they'll go
out there with the deal and say oh
okay well here's the deal we're going to
give this the market we're going to give
you a 1.5 percent
naked indemnity and if you want to go
and get insurance go ahead but this is
what we're going to give you on this
spin
it's that's really that's always fun
seeing the strategic
kind of give at the market what they've
had to eat going into some competitive
deals
i do think it's become more and more
prevalent earlier in my career you
didn't really
see people using reps and warranties
insurance or only two or three insurance
companies that even
offered it and now you see it all over
the place there's a live insurance
companies providing it and we
use it in many many of our deals and in
fact sellers that are running a full
process and have a competitive auction
can require you
to use it and pay for it so you're
definitely
seeing it a lot more and i think because
of the increased prevalence of it
i do find that my deal teams sometimes
are asking me questions that are kind of
funny
that they'll be like well i have this
known issue
and it's not a remote possibility and
it's a known issue can i get insurance
for that
and so i would say the answer to that is
still no yeah sales taxes yes
equal to the amount of the issue so
you're still looking at unknown or kind
of maybe a known remote possibility but
it can
still you know it really can cover a
huge amount of
issues i think especially when you're
looking at being a pbs startup or a tech
company target
they may be really clean and right run a
very tight shop on things like
you know their patent filings but
everything else may be a little bit more
mysterious to that founder
and so that's a great place to really
use that product
i think when you're looking at all
alternative solutions like
reps and warranties insurance or tax
insurance to just to shift risk from
from the deal parties to
to the insurance market um you can look
at it across
more of a spectrum you know and on one
end you've got the truly unknown risks
and on the other end you start to
gravitate more towards known exposures
and just as a quick you know crash
course
reps and warranties insurance functions
the best for unknown exposures
and they'll run through the diligence to
determine what is known on the
underwriting process and then the
expectation is to pick up any
of the exposure that comes through the
reps and breaches of the reps anything
that's unknown
would typically find a home with reps
and warranties insurance and then you
start to gravitate
more down the spectrum if it's a tax
exposure something that's been
identified as exposure but isn't
necessarily a known problem
then you start looking at tax insurance
and like you said there is
definitely a really deep skill set in
the market as far as
how to how to really understand the risk
profile of that particular issue and
maybe underwrite to it so
the rule of thumb is if it's something
you would normally expect a special
indemnity or special escrow on
you probably can't you can't get rep and
warranty insurance probably against that
there are some other insurance products
that we've used like for example we had
a seller that we represented
that was being sued by one of its
competitors and it was anti-competitive
litigation
completely bs and we were able to go out
and get aig to give us a very large
policy against
a bad outcome of that litigation because
aig
underwrote it and concluded the
litigation was bs it was just
anti-competitive
they weren't going this competitor
wasn't going to win
and we went to market with that policy
saying hey
we know these guys have sued us but
we've got protection against that for
all buyers
and that competitor ended up making a
very nice offer to our client who sold
to the competitor
because the bullet had been taken out of
the gun so that's
that we still don't see a lot of those
policies being purchased but we do see
it
i think it's a growth area i mean we've
now got a lot of competition in the
insurance market there's over 20
underwriters and it's putting a lot of
pressure on on individual underwriters
to either get more aggressive
on some of the more commonplace areas
like reps and warranties insurance and
or
tax but in the contingent liability end
of that spectrum
they are probably more rare and they're
they're much more bespoke
but that is one of the developing areas
i'd say as all
as is the mix of who's buying these
types of insurance
products rachel how many deals in your
last year what percentage do you think
used a trend focused on insurance in
some way as being an important part of
the deal
we've considered it in every transaction
we've probably used in about half
like i said there are some auctions
where they really require you to
it's written into the agreement itself
and it's still you could still forfeit
that right
but generally we'll really look at the
company and we'll think like how clean
is this company how impressed are we
with
management and our diligence and whatnot
and sort of a cost-benefit
analysis on the cost of the insurance
versus do we really think that we'll
have identification claims because
remember your indemnity claim is
probably going to be subject to a basket
and a cap before you even get there
so if you look at it you know a 300
million deal
and you have to have a million dollars
of claims before you can
even start to make claims on the policy
it may not be worth it
so dina gets both escrows and insurance
because she has that much leverage but
we do and i was actually going to
mention that um
yeah so the one thing right the one i
guess kind of the opposite side
of of of getting an insurance policy is
you know there were there were a lot of
things where uh you come across them and
they're not connected with reps and
warranties
um and you they're things that you would
otherwise maybe want to get a special
escrow for but you don't want to go
through the headache of negotiating it
and when you were just doing kind of an
escrow generally and you don't have
insurance you know okay so we're going
to get you know a 10 million dollar
escrow okay so 350 000 here and you know
a million dollars there and whatever
like thing things that you find you're
like okay
i'm quantifying it this is what it is
our escrow can handle it okay we're not
going to worry about trying to get a
specific
escrow for it when you go ahead and get
insurance
um you typically well we when we get
insurance we'll end up with an escrow
also but it's a much smaller escrow
right so you know a 200 million dollar
deal you'll end up with you know
a 2 million escrow and then also your
reps and warranties insurance
and so those other odds and ends that
don't fall within the reps and
warranties things so
you know tax or whatever else they start
to add up
really quickly and really quickly you
find that you no longer
have any sort of recourse as you as
you're doing your calculations and
that's not even
you know looking at what actually exists
after you do the acquisition so
you have to be really careful um in
terms of you know sometimes it actually
opens the door
to needing to have the special indemnity
the special escrow conversation that you
otherwise wouldn't
have to have that said on the flip side
of it
i love getting reps and warranties
insurance we've done it in the last few
deals that we've done
because i think an inordinate amount of
time is spent negotiating reps and
warranties right
um just a ridiculous amount of time and
people get very
very heated i think over things that
obviously are super important but like
they're not so much more important than
everything else but
i think it just there's a lot of
emphasis placed on it and it really
smooths the conversation right and you
can also use the insurance companies as
kind of
you know well the insurance you you want
to marry your reps and warranties up
with whatever your insurance will do
well the insurance won't do that so we
got to change it
okay we're good all right fine right so
it really makes it a lot easier and
i'll give you a hypothetical
hypothetically speaking you know
your company goes out company a goes out
and buys you know
some company and the ceo you don't have
reps and warranties insurance
and the ceo gets really upset and feels
beaten up over
uh the way in which the reps and
warranties conversation were handled it
was a clean negotiation but whatever
he didn't like where it ended up then he
comes in at a position that's you know
fairly senior to
you know company a's in company a
and then you have the opportunity to go
and clear the air with them because you
know they're in a position where you get
to continue working with them down the
road and so you want to actually have a
positive
working relationship as opposed to kind
of the angry
hostile you know reps and warranties um
negotiation that occurred so to the
extent insurance can kind of make all of
that disappear
that's that's always a plus in my book
and that is that is the root i think
of the insurance was as a deal
facilitation tool and
we're going to take q a in just a minute
i just probably won't run through one or
two more questions but just to uh
an individual close tool too and that
hypothetical example where between
signing and closing you discover a
breach at your target
and that's actually happened to us in a
deal
and if you have rep and warranty
insurance that you
bound at signing and it turns out the
breach
that occurred was something that wasn't
true
like oh we've updated all our servers
and it turns out that wasn't the case
then as long as that isn't a mac breach
like in the example you know it's not a
mac breach it doesn't kill the deal and
i my buyer still has to close
we can close and then make a claim for
that for damages from that breach
against the insurance so that was a
that's an advantage
for sure uh so i think my last question
for for the panel was just
with respect to caps and with respect to
reduced astros i mean
if you're in a position where you're
either getting escrow and or reps and
warranties insurance or otherwise
well maybe when you're getting insurance
are you seeing are you seeing
fundamental
exposure sellers exposure for
fundamental reps are you seeing that
capital or is that still customarily
going up to purchase for us
i'm definitely seeing a capped i push
back on it really hard i don't like it
i'd rather cut the survival period on a
fundamental rep from being indefinite to
say being three years or two years
but i am definitely seeing that i would
typically
expect it to be a higher cap than the
rest of the independent
indemnification and you know
traditionally maybe it's kept at
purchase pricing no more but now i'm
definitely seeing
something like 10 20 percent people are
really not offering it
i take small comfort in the fact that if
you've reached your fundamentals you've
probably committed fraud and that is an
exception to all of the
indemnity package in any case yeah
we're seeing a cap we're pretty
successful in pushing back against it
um it depends i mean it really depends
on if we're willing to walk away or not
over this issue but yeah
they try i know i know on our side of
the house we've struggled for a couple
years now too
because it's a very relatively remote
risk right it's just that the magnitude
is
so extreme um and so we've we've
worked to try to find a way in the
insurance market
uh the options that we had to take
fundamental reps even if it was a
slightly reduced pricing or rate
was just a little bit unhinged when you
were or maybe un
not satisfactorily correlated with the
actual risk exposure
so i think one of the interesting
developments on our side has been
finding capacity out there to address
just fundamentals and fraud exposure for
that matter
at a highly aggressive rate where it
does make sense to take it up
beyond even one of those elevated caps
of about 20 but maybe considering going
up to 50
or 75 or even up the purchase price
where it's necessary
we had a client that had to do a deal
where it had to agree to cap
fundamentals
at very at a single digit and
um they to get the was a conservative
buyer and they said fine i'll just how
much will rep and warranty insurance
cost
to ensure 100 of my deal value against
fundamental breach and
the seller paid for half that and they
shook hands
i do think it's a sign of how outrageous
the market is right now
that people can argue with a straight
face that they shouldn't have to
identify fundamentals because
i mean how can you say like well i'm not
authorized to actually sell you this
company or i don't actually
own this company but they do if i
represent the seller though you know i'm
going to say
i had a fundamental rep breach on a deal
and it was small and it was simply you
know they didn't track somebody's stock
option
so one stock option was not on the
ledger but still
you know that's money and it should not
be out of our pocket as buyer
agreed so with that i think i'd open it
up to the floor to the extent that
anybody has any questions
well i have a question larry does this
insurance thing really pay
uh yes it does obviously yeah i mean
well you've got as much experience as i
do on it yeah no
no i mean we certainly have been across
a variety of different insurers worked
through and had
you know varied experience where at some
points we've really had to work through
because it is still a negotiation
and i think that the insurers will still
do as dutiful a job
as a seller would i mean you know where
you mean they'll kick and scream like by
sellers when uh
we have indemnification claims against
us yeah i mean i think if you're not
expecting that you're probably the wrong
line right but
um at the same time we have had great
recent experience in the
seven eight figure range where the
claims have been paid out on a financial
statements breach
right at around the level that the
claim was for so with a multiple for
with a multiple on it so
it's um you know it does pay and there
the examples i think what's happened is
with the prevalence of the insurance
over the last few years we're now
starting to see more and more waves of
claims come in and you've had more
policies in force for longer
and so the claims experience is growing
and while not reported as much i think
as many people would like to see just
because a lot of claims are subject to
confidentiality the
the experience is is growing more robust
and more positive
i had one question how many of you have
seen leak
clauses in your agreements where there's
fines if the seller or the buyer leaks
the transaction
i've not had that in any transaction i
haven't either
because they're really damaging as far
as you know the whole process and trust
and things like that
i completely agree and a lot of our
transactions unfortunately get leaked
um but i you know there's just so many
parties involved and so many different
advisors i
one it's not surprising and two frankly
i think sometimes parties plant them
oh yeah definitely yeah usually
regarding specific diligence
items that are being shared
we do spend a lot of time negotiating
ndas which i find to be sort of a waste
of time since nobody ever enforces them
[Laughter]
well i mean i know on the insurance side
as well i mean
we'll obviously run through those ndas
and then we subsequently have to get all
the other parties with whom we're having
conversations execute the ndas as well
so i do think from a
documentation perspective it's very well
covered and i think
from an experience perspective i i think
important to be dealing with folks that
have the same commitment to
confidentiality
that's right
i'm gonna jump in if i could can you
give us a sense
when when do you see post-closed claims
do you see him in
three months six months or is it the day
before
the expiration at whatever it happens to
be 18 months what's the experience
we've seen it all but i would say one
inflection point
is when you're doing the purchase price
adjustment buyers getting there getting
to drive the car
off the lot taking it home kicking the
tires at home and that's where we see
a lot of a lot of claims made is during
that process it might not be a purchase
price adjustment
but it might be something else that they
discover in that process
i'd say integration is really important
particularly for strategics because
the the fact that you have a deal team
that knows you have indemnities that
expire in a certain amount of time for
certain promises
i have seen situations where folks
completely blew that
like oh we had an escrow for this and it
just was people not talking in-house
about issues that they were having with
this new target
so the next i you know it really the
next inflection point i'd say after that
usually in the first year and follow-up
question if i could what about when
there is a claim
is that a 12-18 month scenario or is it
is it tighter
i would say the experience varies but
typically
it's not a quick process because it
involves questions if they were
questions enough that no one figured it
out in the deal diligence usually it's
going to require
an ey or someone to do a financial
analysis if it's a financial or tax loss
or some other investigation then you
have to convince the seller
or the insurer or both that they owe you
money
or if i represent the seller you have to
make a really locked solid case that you
get our money
but i mean what are you guys seeing i'm
it's not quick
yeah i think you know independent claims
like will often come up when you're
doing the first audit
um during your ownership or frankly it's
just something random that comes up
out of the blue and and bites you um i
think
typically when you're sending a claim
letter it's
not straightforward you're not sending a
letter saying dear so-and-so
this happened you owe me a hundred
dollars it's usually dear stone so this
happened i don't really know how much it
will
be but i'm putting you on notice that i
have a claim and we'll figure it out as
it goes along
that's true for tax claims litigation
that comes up environmental issues
whatever it is it's more putting a stake
in the ground and saying you owe me
money
as opposed to making a specific claim
until you work it out
how long are they sorry so
if you're looking at it from a buyer
it'll differ from a buy side or sell
side policy but if you're looking at it
from a buy-side policy a couple of the
advantages
is obviously you can determine how much
insurance you want to buy but you'll
also extend the survival out
so even if you were looking at a no
seller recourse
where there was no survival customarily
general reps
would be taken out in north america out
to about three years
and tax and fundamental reps will
survive six years post-closing yeah we
get taxed at six or more
which is really advantageous because in
a normal deal that i do
if you have actual identification the
survival is never three years anymore
yeah i'll say from a strategic
perspective also i mean we know
really quickly if there's a problem just
because of the integration process right
that we get the company is as we're
integrating it
we're seeing all the warts right so we
find out really quickly
and and certainly know within the
three-year period um if there's a claim
to be made
had a tax claim come in at four years
the other day it was a company that we
sold after three we bought it bought
reps insurance
sold it three years later and then the
new buyer had a tax claim that related
back to our purchase
so four years later we were making a
claim on our policy
yeah can happen yeah i think
i think common expectations were that
most claims would come in within that
first audit cycle
but again even with the limited
reporting aig puts out a claim study and
i think they had reported where
there was a significant number of claims
that would come in after the 12-month
period
so it's it's been interesting i think
it's evolving
um how about another uh this is a little
out of sequence but timing question
um danny you intrigued me when you talk
about it being a faster
easier negotiation
are you talking cutting a week off of
the time or
a day how meaningful and material does
it tend to be
if you can use reps and warrants as
opposed to arguing it all out
yeah i don't think i can quantify it
that way um it's
more it's more along the lines of like
you got the list of stuff you got to
deal with and it's just one less thing
you have to deal with right so
every negotiation is different every
deal is different
and candidly you know within a strategic
it's not just how fast can i negotiate
the purchase agreement right there's a
lot of other people
doing a lot of other things that have to
happen before
we can write our check and you know sign
the deal
and you know everything's good right so
um it doesn't i you know
yes it can certainly shorten things but
in a lot of situations
the contract isn't necessarily the thing
that's slowing things up the contract is
marching to the beat
of the internal drummer
yeah that's right i don't think the
timing of a transaction is really
set by the negotiation of the contract
itself because the negotiation
really starts well before that as you go
through your diligence you know
pre-legal group
diligence you're finding things that you
have to talk out you have to set up the
structure the transaction
and how your purchase price will be set
up there's a lot determined before you
get to the contract and frankly the
contract can go as quickly
or as slowly as people want it to go
i'll say diligence is probably the thing
and that's
a lot some of our i mean our strategic
clients tend to be
do better dillage than even financial
buyers because they're usually in that
sector they have people who are working
there all day long may have even worked
with the target
or its products and some of those
strategics though they overkill the
diligence
and i did have one strategy that came to
us with uh saying how much
diligence this international deal and it
was like two and a half million dollars
it was an incredible amount of diligence
it wouldn't have made the seller happy
and they said whoa
okay how much diligence do we need to do
if we just want to get
insurance against some of these very
remote risks that they were going to
send people to foreign countries to look
at
and it turned out to be a lot cheaper so
that's what they did but diligence i
think is often
the the slowdown not really the yeah
you know when i was at kirkland one of
my major clients was a large strategic
and they
you know they would have to get 30
people into a room one from each
department and all seek alignment
that was kind of their buzzword and you
had to align on whatever it was and
every department had to sign off which
i'm sure drives deena crazy all day long
so you know that's a really different
experience from you know my private
equity fund clients who have a deal team
of three people and who can make
decisions very quickly
they do have to rely on industry experts
and we have to use you know an insurance
expert and a
accounting expert and a tax expert and
whatever but those people come in
they kind of do the down and dirty and
give us a higher
overview view of the world i think at
times strategics can pay more but we
usually can move faster
and perhaps be more accommodating on
things like deal terms
a lot of these times these sellers are
trying to operate a fast growing company
at the same time they're trying to meet
your diligence requests
as a as and again some strategics just
forget that and it ends up really
you know they say gosh the target's not
responsive at all well it's because the
people that you're
making these requests to are also
running a business that is growing so
fast you're paying 20 times ebitda
so pick your battles
[Music]
you